The user guide (#110)
FDio/govpp: docs/USER_GUIDE.md

> # GoVPP user guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# GoVPP User Guide
```

> * [Binary API generator](#binary-api-generator)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Table of Contents

* [Binary API generator](#binary-api-generator)
```

Author: Added but to me it's redundant

>     * [Installation](#Installation)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * [Installation](#installation)
```

        * [Using the Go toolchain](#using-the--go-toolchain)
        * [From the source](#from-the-source)
    * [Plugins](#plugins)
    * [Options](#options)
* [VPP API calls](#vpp-api-calls)
    * [Connection](#connection)
        * [Synchronous](#synchronous-connect)
        * [Asynchronous](#asynchronous-connect)
    * [Sending API messages](#sending-api-messages)
        * [Channel](#channel)
        * [Stream client](#stream-client)
* [The RPC service](#the-rpc-service)
* [VPP stats](#vpp-stats)
    * [Low-level API connection](#low-level-stats-api-connection)
    * [Low-level API usage](#low-level-stats-api-usage)

## Binary API generator

The binary API generator's purpose is to create Go bindings out of the VPP `.json` binary API definitions.

### Installation

Requires Go 1.18 or higher ([download](https://golang.org/dl))

#### Using the  Go toolchain

> Latest version (most recent tag):
> 
> ```
> go install go.fd.io/govpp/cmd/binapi-generator@latest
> ```
> 
> Development version (master branch):
> 
> ```
> go install go.fd.io/govpp/cmd/binapi-generator@master
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install binapi-generator using Go toolchain, run:

```console
# Latest release
go install go.fd.io/govpp/cmd/binapi-generator@latest

# Specific version
go install go.fd.io/govpp/cmd/binapi-generator@v0.7.0

# Development version (master)
go install go.fd.io/govpp/cmd/binapi-generator@master
```

#### From the source

Clone the repository:

```
git clone https://github.com/FDio/govpp
```

Call the following make taget inside:

```
make install-generator

> ```

Reviewer: I think we can omit this section for the User Guide. The previous method is essentially installing from source, just cloning & building in the background.

> # Generate API bindings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Generate VPP API bindings
```

At first, you need VPP JSON API bindings to build go bindings from.
Build the VPP locally, or download
from `packagecloud.io` ([learn more](https://fd.io/docs/vpp/master/gettingstarted/installing)).

JSON API files are located in `/usr/share/vpp/api/`

```
$ make generate-binapi 
# installing binapi-generator v0.8.0-alpha-6-g2054a76-dirty
# generating binapi
binapi-generator -input-dir=/usr/share/vpp/api -output-dir=. -gen=rpc
INFO[0000] resolved VPP version from installed package: 23.06-rc0~65-g2ddb2fdaa
INFO[0000] Generating 236 files                         
binapi-generator -input-file=/usr/share/vpp/api/core/vpe.api.json -output-dir=. -gen=http
INFO[0000] resolved VPP version from installed package: 23.06-rc0~65-g2ddb2fdaa
INFO[0000] Generating 3 files   
```

> Generated files can be found in `/binapi` package.

Reviewer: This should be rewritten for User Guide according to:

- getting VPP should be separate section
- no need to build the VPP to generate bindings, just run `make json-api-files` and select folder under build-root
- using `make generate-binapi` to generate binapi is for developers working on the GoVPP, but this guide should provide steps how to generate bindings in user applications - for example creating `gen.go` file with `//go:generate binapi-generator ...`

### Plugins

The binary API generator supports custom plugins generating additional files.

> Available plugins:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optional built-in plugins:
```

- `http` generates HTTP handlers

> - `rpc` generates RPC services

Reviewer: A short section for each of these should follow where it shows sample of generated code. Or at least a point to related part of this document.

### Options

> 

Reviewer: This needs some sentence of what is being listed below with example of usage: e.g.`binapi-generator [OPTIONS] ARGS`

- `version` prints the generator version, for example, `govpp v0.8.0-dev`

> - `gen` allows injecting generator plugin (`rpc` is the default)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `gen` list of generator plugins separated by comma to be enabled (`rpc` is the default)
```

> - `import-prefix` generates files with custom import prefix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `import-prefix` custom prefix for imports in the generated files
```

- `input-dir` sets the custom input directory instead of the default
- `output-dir` sets the custom output directory
- `debug` prints some additional logs

## VPP API calls

GoVPP uses adapters to talk to VPP sockets.

* **socketclient** connects to the VPP `api.sock` and supports all VPP binary APIs

> * **statsclient** connects to the VPP `stats.sock` and reads VPP stats

Reviewer: This does not fit this section.

### Connection

Two connection types to the binary API socket exist - synchronous and asynchronous. GoVpp can connect to more VPPs by

> creating multiple connections.

Reviewer: > GoVpp can connect to more VPPs by creating multiple connections.

This should include link to the relevant example **multi-vpp**.

#### Synchronous connect

The synchronous connect creates a new adapter instance. The call blocks until the connection is established.

```
conn, err := govpp.Connect(socketPath)
if err != nil {
    // handle the error
}
defer conn.Disconnect()
```

#### Asynchronous connect

The main difference between the synchronous and asynchronous connection is that the asynchronous connection does not
block until the connection is ready. Instead, the caller receives a channel to watch connection events.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```go
```

Author: Added `go` syntax highlighting everywhere

conn, connEv, err := govpp.AsyncConnect(socketPath, attemptNum, interval)
if err != nil {
    // handle error
}
defer conn.Disconnect()

// wait for the connection event
e := <-connEv
if e.State != core.Connected {
   // handle error in e.Error
}
```

You might notice additional parameters `attemptNum` and `interval` defining the number of reconnect attempts, and an

> interval (in seconds) between those attempts.

Author: Rephrased, but I'd avoid copying comments to any guide (unless really necessary), that's what `pkg.go.dev` is for

> ### Sending API messages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Send VPP API request
```

Each binary API message in the Go-generated API is a data structure. The caller can send API messages either using

> the `Channel`, or the `Stream client`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `Channel` (legacy method), or the `Stream` (preferred).
```

This should also include links to the discussion #43 that contains more details.

Messages can be requests or responses. The request might expect just one response (request), or more than one

> response (multirequest). It is possible to determine the message type out of its name.

Reviewer: There is another type of requests, "special dump" which does not require control ping to be sent together with dump and sends two types of responses; zero or more _details and then _reply.

Author: True, I've added details later in the doc, this is the basic division. "Special dumps" are also multi requests.

* *_Requests_* have no special suffix for the request, or `Dump` or `Get` for the multirequest.

> * *_Responses_* have a `Reply` suffix for the request or `Details` for multirequest.

Reviewer: This is not really consistent across entire VPP API.

Author: I'll mention that

#### Channel

The `Channel` is the main communication unit between the caller and the VPP. After the successful connection, the
channel is simply created from the connection object.

```
ch, err := conn.NewAPIChannel()
if err != nil {
    // handle error
}
```

The new channel starts watching caller requests immediately.

> The channel allows direct compatibility check of messages from any generated Go binary API file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The channel can do a compatibility check for all the messages from any generated VPP API file.
```

```
if err := ch.CheckCompatiblity(vpe.AllMessages()...); err != nil {
    // handle error
}
```

A single request is done by calling the asynchronous request/reply on a channel. The request returns the request context
allowing to receive the reply.

```
req := &interfaces.CreateLoopback{} // fill with data
reply := &interfaces.CreateLoopbackReply{}
if err := ch.SendRequest(req).ReceiveReply(reply); err != nil {
    // handler error
}
```

The multirequest expects more than one response. Its context contains information about the last item in the request
list.

```
req := &interfaces.SwInterfaceDump{} // fill with data
reqCtx := ch.SendMultiRequest(req)
for {
    reply := &interfaces.SwInterfaceDetails{}
    stop, err := reqCtx.ReceiveReply(reply)
    if err != nil {
       // handle error
    }
    if stop {
        break
    }
    // handle the reply before the next iteration
}
```

*_Note: the multirequest message suffixed with `Get` needs a different type of handling using the stream client._*

#### Stream client

> The `Stream` is an alternative "low-level" API offering better control of the communication process but requires the
> user to handle the message type and order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Stream` is the new and preferred way to call VPP API. It provides a "low-level" API to allow complete control of the communication process. This means that it requires the caller to handle all aspects of VPP API semantics, e.g. send control ping after dump request, check message type and value of `Retval` field in responses. 

> **Note**
> Handling of the VPP API semantics mentioned above is only required when using `Stream` directly. Users should use generated RPC clients which handles all of this automatically.
```

Author: Thanks

> The `Stream` client is created from the connection instance (as the channel is):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New `Stream` can be created by calling `Connection`'s method `NewStream`:
```

```
stream, err := conn.NewStream(context.Background(), options...)
if err != nil {
   // handle error
}
```

> The stream can be customized with the following options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `NewStream` method also accepts following options:
```

* `WithRequestSize` sets the size of the request channel buffer
* `WithReplySize` sets the size of the reply channel buffer

> * `WithReplyTimeout` sets the reply timeout

Reviewer: Include function parameters. `WithRequestSize(size int)`

		}
	}
```

There is another type of the multirequest, and this one needs to be handled differently. It can be easily identified
with the `Get` suffix and the **cursor** parameter. This type of multirequest is read in batches. Each batch has a
number of data replies, and if the reader should continue with another batch, the cursor points to the next index.

The user has to expect two reply types, the `Details` containing the data, and the `Reply` marking the end of the batch,
and the new cursor value.

The initial batch always starts with zero.

```
cursor uint32 = 0
for {
    if cursor == ^uint32(0) { // cursor pointing to this value marks the end of the multirequest
        return
    }
    req := &pnat.PnatBindingsGet{
		Cursor: cursor,
	}
    if err := stream.SendMsg(req); err != nil {
		// handle error
	}
	// new batch loop
	for {
		msg, err := stream.RecvMsg()
		if err != nil {
			// handle error
		}
		switch reply := msg.(type) {
		case *pnat.PnatBindingsDetails:
			// handle the data
			})
		case *pnat.PnatBindingsGetReply:
		    cursor = reply.Cursor // the new cursor value
		    // handle error
		    break
		default:
			// unexpected reply type
		}
	}
}
```

> ## The RPC service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## RPC Client
```

> Before using the RPC service, the VPP binary API binding must be generated with the `rpc` plugin to create RPC files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The RPC client is a client implementation generated by generator plugin `rpc` in separate file named `*.rpc.ba` for each generated file (package) of the VPP binary API.
```

> Each RPC service file defines the `RPCService` interface with methods available for the given file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each generated VPP binary API file (package) contains RPC service defined by interface `RPCService`. This interface defines methods for each service RPC defined by that VPP API file.
```

Add sample for `RPCService` interface from **vpe** file.

> Create the new RPC service client (requires the connection instance)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create the new RPC service client, use function `NewServiceClient(conn api.Connection)`, which accepts the connection instance.
```

// Specific version
go install go.fd.io/govpp/cmd/binapi-generator@v0.8.0

// Development version (the master branch):
go install go.fd.io/govpp/cmd/binapi-generator@master
```

Check the binapi generator is installed:

```
$ binapi-generator -version
govpp v0.8.0-dev
```

# Source of VPP API input files

At first, you need VPP JSON API bindings to build go bindings from. There are several ways to get it.

1. Download from `packagecloud.io` ([learn more](https://fd.io/docs/vpp/master/gettingstarted/installing)).
2. Clone the VPP repository `git clone https://github.com/FDio/vpp.git` and run `make json-api-files`. Built JSON files
   can be found in `/vpp/build-root/install-vpp-native/vpp/share/vpp/api/`.
3. If the VPP is already built, the default JSON API path is `/usr/share/vpp/api/`

# Generate VPP API bindings

If the VPP JSON API definitions are in the default directory `/usr/share/vpp/api`, call:

```
binapi-generator
```

Binding will be created in the current directory in `/binapi` package.

To modify the VPP JSON API input directory, use `-input-dir` option. To modify the output directory, use
the `-output-dir` option.

```

> binapi-generator -input-dir=/path/to/vpp/api -output-dir=/path/to/generated/bindings

Author: This is mentioned later, but I'll make a note here as well.

```

> 

Author: Added to `options` section

an interval (in seconds) between those attempts.

```go
conn, connEv, err := govpp.AsyncConnect(socketPath, attemptNum, interval)
if err != nil {
// handle error
}
defer conn.Disconnect()

// wait for the connection event
e := <-connEv
if e.State != core.Connected {
// handle error in e.Error
}
```

### Sending API messages

Each binary API message in the Go-generated API is a data structure. The caller can send API messages either using
the `Channel` (legacy method), or the `Stream client` (preferred). In-depth discussion about differences
between `Channel` and `Stream` can be found [here](https://github.com/FDio/govpp/discussions/43).

Messages can be requests or responses. The request might expect just one response (request), or more than one
response (multirequest). It is possible to determine the message type out of its name.

*_Note: the naming might not be consistent across the VPP API_*

* *_Requests_* have no special suffix for the request, or `Dump` or `Get` for the multirequest.
* *_Responses_* have a `Reply` suffix for the request or `Details` for multirequest.

> #### Channel

Reviewer 2: As it's getting deprecated, maybe we could move this after the "Stream" section, and also add a Deprecated note with a ⚠️ emoji

Reviewer: Or use

> **Warning**
> This is getting deprecated!
